docs: Add Druid 28 release notes and upgrade notes (#15315)
apache/druid: docs/release-info/release-notes.md

---
id: release-notes
title: "Release notes"
---

<!--
  ~ Licensed to the Apache Software Foundation (ASF) under one
  ~ or more contributor license agreements.  See the NOTICE file
  ~ distributed with this work for additional information
  ~ regarding copyright ownership.  The ASF licenses this file
  ~ to you under the Apache License, Version 2.0 (the
  ~ "License"); you may not use this file except in compliance
  ~ with the License.  You may obtain a copy of the License at
  ~
  ~   http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0
  ~
  ~ Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing,
  ~ software distributed under the License is distributed on an
  ~ "AS IS" BASIS, WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY
  ~ KIND, either express or implied.  See the License for the
  ~ specific language governing permissions and limitations
  ~ under the License.
  -->
  

> Apache Druid 28.0.0 contains over $NUMBER_FEATURES new features, bug fixes, performance enhancements, documentation improvements, and additional test coverage from $NUMBER_OF_CONTRIBUTORS contributors.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Apache Druid 28.0.0 contains over 420 new features, bug fixes, performance enhancements, documentation improvements, and additional test coverage from 57 contributors.
```

Enable window functions in your query with the `enableWindowing: true` context parameter.

[#15184](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/15184)

## Concurrent append and replace (experimental)

Druid 28.0.0 adds experimental support for concurrent append and replace.
This feature allows you to safely replace the existing data in an interval of a datasource while new data is being appended to that interval. One of the most common applications of this is appending new data to an interval while compaction of that interval is already in progress.
For more information, see [Concurrent append and replace](https://druid.apache.org/docs/latest/data-management/automatic-compaction#concurrent-append-and-replace).

Segment locking will be deprecated and removed in favor of concurrent append and replace that is much simpler in design. With concurrent append and replace, Druid doesn't lock compaction jobs out because of active realtime ingestion.

### Task locks for append and replace batch ingestion jobs

> Append batch ingestion jobs can now share locks. This allows you to run multiple append batch ingestion jobs against the same time internal. Replace batch ingestion jobs still require an exclusive lock. This means you can run multiple append batch ingestion jobs and one replace batch ingestion job for a given interval.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Append batch ingestion jobs can now share locks. This allows you to run multiple append batch ingestion jobs against the same time interval. Replace batch ingestion jobs still require an exclusive lock. This means you can run multiple append batch ingestion jobs and one replace batch ingestion job for a given interval.
```

> ### Notable improvements

Reviewer 2: These should be bug fixes IMO. Many of these were regressions introduced in this release or something that would have likely become more common due to the changes in this release.
